---
layout: post
title: My Undergraduate Experience - Getting Involved Through Undergrad Research
tags: []

---

At my undergrad institution, it is pretty standard for students to either continue on to the master’s program to study IR (to later go into NGOs and other nonprofit agencies) or to attend law school. As a junior (who had only switched my major to political science my sophomore year), I thought that I wanted to go to law school as well. Though I wasn’t interested in practicing the law, but rather studying it and the history of law in the United States (pretty broad, huh?).

One of the faculty in the political science department had stopped to talk to me on campus once, and we had talked about their research; which, I found to be really interesting. They invited me to come to their office. The Spring semester of my Junior year, I took a class from that faculty member and would attend their office hours as often as possible. Outside of the readings assigned for the class, I would try to find books on topics related to political communication and behavior. When annotating the assigned readings, I would look at the citations that the authors would make and try to read as much of the related literature as possible. The final assignment of that political communication class was to write a paper that went just short of collecting and analyzing the data (although many of the students in the class had already taken methodology courses, some hadn’t). So, we had to come up with a research question, write a theory, propose a hypothesis, and present a sound research design.

While slugging the paper out, I would try to emulate what I had seen in published articles — particularly from authors with the highest reputation. I suppose that the idea for the paper was good enough because the instructor suggested that we try to run some experiments to see if my idea was right. In hindsight, the paper was terrible. The idea was decent (actually, I am still working on papers that expand from that original project). I feel, however, that if I had simply indicated that it would be interesting to run some experiments for that project but never follow-up with the instructor or if I never tried to improve the research design based on the feedback and read more about the topic, the project would have never taken off. I certainly wouldn’t be in the same position that I am in today.

Boiling it down, undergraduate research needs a patient faculty member who will find the right balance between pushing their student, but also being realistic with the student’s skill set. Undergraduate research also requires a student who is willing to work and is curious. At my undergraduate institution there were many students that I feel are much more intelligent than I. When it comes down to it, a student who is willing to challenge themselves to make the leap from writing like an undergraduate student (not that there is anything wrong with it… it’s just different) and writing with authority and expertise on a topic is absolutely necessary. A student who isn’t interested in research enough, likely won’t take that leap. I really do feel that it was a perfect storm of a very patient mentor and my obsessive personality.

As many know, there is a powerful level of resolve that you need for when you receive that first desk rejection (me) or didn’t have a good enough of a paper to warrant publication (also me). When you are repeatedly told that your paper isn’t good enough – after months of writing and rewriting – it is too easy to get really down on yourself and wonder whether or not you belong. Everyone feels this… this is imposter syndrome. According to many successful people that I have talked to, you never lose that feeling.

Students: if a faculty member reaches out to you and offers an opportunity, take it! If a faculty member takes time to invest in you, recognize the sacrifice they are making! Respond to their emails! If you say you will do something, do it! Be professional! Be curious! Just remember, if your professor identifies you as someone they would like to perform research with, it is because they have trust in you and they think that you can do it!
