---
layout: post
title: Applying to Graduate School

---
I did not realize that graduate school was an option for me until the summer before my last year of undergrad. Even then, I felt that it was something that I could try for, but wouldn’t likely go. I just wanted to do research. I loved reading academic articles. It was the most convenient way (in my humble opinion) to learn about the world. The more I read the more questions that I had. As a result, I began to write as a way to make sense of what I already know about a given topic and to identify these holes. As I became more comfortable with managing data, I started to play with PEW and ANES datasets to see what of my questions I could answer. I don’t think there was ever a day as an undergraduate where I said that I wanted to be a graduate student. I knew I just wanted to do research. After having a faculty member take me under their wing, I knew that if I wanted a chance at making it my career (to allow my curiosity to run free) I would need to attend a graduate program.

At the time I was working as a manager of student employees and was a business analyst for an organization on my campus. This was pretty demanding in that I was often responsive to questions and resolving problems at all hours of the day. I was in the office usually 30 hours a week (sometimes close to 35 or down to 25). At the time I was also newly married. All of this is to say, I wish that I had found a better balance my time between classes, work, personal life, and preparing my materials for graduate school.

If you are someone who is interested in performing research, plan on going to graduate school. Only do this if you are PASSIONATE, though. Academia is not easy. The job prospects are terrible, at best. Graduate school puts you behind your friends who went into the working world as soon as they received their diploma. Instead, you will be intensely trained to be a scholar. This is would be great if job openings as a scholar were more secure. But they are not. So if you love research and are passionate, do it. If not (or more importantly, not entirely sure), take some time. Take time to save money, to build your resume, make connections outside of academia (you may need them later).

For those who are still determined to attend graduate school, here are some things I wish I did/knew about the application process before going in:

<ul>
<li><strong>Save as much money as you can!</strong> Applications are expensive. The GRE is expensive. Campus visits are expensive. Moving is expensive. Waiting to recieve your first pay check (that may go towards student fees and books for the semester) will be a nagging thing that seems to never arrive. So, save money.</li>

<li><strong>Take time to study for the GRE! Don’t procrastinate on this.</strong> Do not assume that you’ll be fine if you take a couple practice tests and get scores (good on you if you can take a cold practice test and not feel like you are a massive idiot who retained nothing from your high school math classes). Unfortunately, the GRE is an important test. Give yourself ample time to execute an awesome study plan. When sigining up for the exam, give yourself time to take a second or a third test in case you don’t do well the first time. Do not bank on taking the GRE once. I did. Although, it ended up working out despite my scores not being up to snuff, I got lucky in that I had other parts of my application that spoke to my capabilities. Don’t put yourself in the position where you wish that you could’ve gotten into that one program that had average cohort GRE scores higher than yours. It’s a lot easier to be rejected by a program due to one of the many idiosyncratic reasons someone is accepted or rejected.</li>

<li><strong>Speaking of, know that there are many factors that lead to one’s acceptance or rejection into a program.</strong> Unlike applying to university, there are not “safe schools.” Factors beyond your GPA, research experience, and your test scores can impact whether or not you are accepted into a program. Things like faculty availability/future career moves can impact whether or not you get in. Also, maybe last year, too many students commited to the program so they now have to accept less students this year to account for this. That can also be found at the subfield level, too. A program may plan to accept 3 conflict/civil war students each year. They may have had 4 commit to the program. Now, they can only accept 2, maybe 1. So, just plan for a lot of weird stuff to come up when you start recieving decisions from schools.</li>

<li><strong>Ask faculty to write their letters of recommendation early!</strong> DO NOT wait until the week before applications are due to ask them to write an LOR. Let them know a few months in advance that you intend to list them as a reference in your applications. When you do that, provide information like what your research interests are, what faculty you would like to work for, what you like about each program, when the applications are due, etc. Also, if there is someone you want to write an LOR, make sure that they are actually comfortable with doing so. If you haven’t been a stellar student in their classes, or if you are rude to them, then find someone else. Do not put faculty in the position to either feel like they need to lie or to write a terrible LOR and they have to grapple with the guilt of possibly being why you weren’t accepted into a graduate program. If a faculty member isn’t comfortable with giving you a stellar LOR, then find someone else. Don’t do that to faculty, it really bothers some of them to write a negative, but honest LORs.</li>

<li><strong>Have people read your Statement of Purpose!</strong> When writing your SOP, don’t talk about your life story. This needs to be a clear and concise explanation of what your research interests and goals are. Identify specific faculty you are interested in working under. Explain why you want to work for them. Explain specific aspects of the department that you think will help you reach these research goals. It is not a personal statement. They are different. Feel free to include minimal (but relevant) anecdotes explaining why you may be interested in a given topic. For example, if you grew up in an indian reservation and are interested in studying the political representation of indiginous people, that is a good way to communicate your research interests, a bit about yourself, and why you are passionate enough to take on the many struggles associated with a life in academia. Once you have it put together, have as many people as possible read over it!</li>

<li><strong>Start filling out your applications early!</strong> Some programs may require extra long writing samples or a SOP and a Personal statement or whatever! You never know what they want until you open the application. So, begin early.</li>

<li><strong>If you have connections to a particular program or have questions, reach out!</strong> If you know someone in the department, or if you have questions that can’t be answered on the website, reach out to a potential faculty member you would like to work with. Just don’t send an email about some administrative issue to a faculty member, this will just annoy them.</li>

<li><strong>A writing sample should be as close to a published paper as possible!</strong> Perhaps the easiest way to convince a graduate program to accept you is to show that you already know your way around performing independent research. There are varying levels of skill with this. Do not worry if it isn’t publishible yet. Some people are going into graduate school without any background in statistics or without too much experience writing a research design or a theory. That is fine. The purpose of graduate school is to train you to perform independent research that meets high standards. You do not have to already be there when applying. But, try to demonstrate that you are heading in that direction and that with a bit more time, they’d be missing out on having a wonderful researcher coming out of their program.</li>

<li><strong>Once you have all of your materials together, breathe and throw your phone into a body of water!</strong> Seriously, do not go onto gradcafe.com or obsessively check your email. DO NOT DO IT. You need to save your insurance’s free therapy sessions for once graduate school begins. You stressing about hearing back from a program will not change your fate. Sit back, read a good book, pick up a hobby, binge-watch the latest show that you don’t understand why everyone loves so much. Just do something other than worry about what school you’ll be hearing from soon. While that is much easier to say now than when I was in that same position, it is true. Just find ways to distract yourself. Soon, you will be recieving an email to your account saying “Congratualations” as the subject line. You will then want to cry, and wonder what you have just done, and brag to all of your friends. Just, save all of the emotion for when you actually recieve the acceptance. Soon you will be on campus visits, “negotiating” for a graduate student stipend, and will be meeting many wonderful like-minded people. Then, you can have a series of other “what have I done moments after all of the glitz fades away.” Until then, though…. start preppin’ those materials!!!</li>

<li><strong>There are many other resources and lists on the internet similar to this. This, though, needs to be everywhere!</strong> There are many, many, many students who are first-generation graduate students and have little to no knowledge of how to go about the graduate school application process. I hope this reaches out to a few students who would benefit academia! I will always allow myself to be redundant on this blog if it means that academia can have people from more diverse backgrounds represented. We need unique ideas! If anyone needs advice, is feeling stressed, has no clue what they are doing, or just want to bounce some ideas off of me, please feel free to tweet (@damoncroberts) at me or to send me an email (damonroberts42@gmail.com). Also, if you would like me to look over an SOP or a personal statement, please let me know! If I have time, I’d be happy to help in any way that I can. It’s the perfect time of year to start working on your materials, so get going!</li>
</ul>
